The cat (Felis catus), also known as the domestic cat or housecat to
distinguish it from other felids and felines, is a small, furry, domesticated,
carnivorous mammal that is valued by humans for its companionship and for its
ability to hunt vermin and household pests. Cats have been associated with
humans for at least 9,500 years, and are currently the most popular pet in
the world. Owing to their close association with humans, cats are now found
almost everywhere in the world.
Cats are similar in anatomy to the other felids, with strong, flexible bodies,
quick reflexes, sharp retractable claws, and teeth adapted to killing small
prey. As nocturnal predators, cats use their acute hearing and ability to see
in near darkness to locate prey. Not only can cats hear sounds too faint for
human ears, they can also hear sounds higher in frequency than humans can
perceive. This is because the usual prey of cats (particularly rodents such as
mice) make high frequency noises, so the hearing of the cat has evolved to
pinpoint these faint high-pitched sounds. Cats also have a much better sense
of smell than humans.
Despite being solitary hunters, cats are a social species and use a variety of
vocalizations, pheromones and types of body language for communication. These
include meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, and grunting.
Cats have a rapid breeding rate. Under controlled breeding, they can be bred
and shown as registered pedigree pets, a hobby known as cat fancy. Failure to
control the breeding of pet cats by spaying and neutering and the abandonment
of former household pets has resulted in large numbers of feral cats
worldwide, with a population of up to 60 million of these animals in the
United States alone.
As The New York Times wrote in 2007, "Until recently the cat was commonly
believed to have been domesticated in ancient Egypt, where it was a cult
animal", but a study that year revealed that the lines of descent of all
house cats probably run through as few as five self-domesticating African
Wildcats (Felis silvestris lybica) c. 8000 BC, in the Near East. The
earliest direct evidence of cat domestication is a kitten that was buried
alongside a human 9,500 years ago in Cyprus.

