The Dvorak layout was designed to replace the QWERTY keyboard layout (the de
facto standard keyboard layout, so named for the starting letters in the top
row), in which keys are arranged to avoid mechanical jams on the first
generation of economically successful typewriters. The original QWERTY
keyboard suffers from many problems that Dvorak himself identified:
Many common letter combinations require awkward finger motions.
Many common letter combinations are typed with the same finger.
Many common letter combinations require a finger to jump over the home row.
Many common letter combinations are typed with one hand while the other sits
idle.
Most typing is done with the left hand, which for most people is the weaker
hand.
Many common letter combinations are typed by adjacent fingers, which is slower
than using other fingers.
About 30% of typing is done on the lower row, which is the slowest and most
difficult row to reach.
About 52% of keyboard strokes are done in the top row, requiring the fingers
to travel away from the home row most of the time.
Dvorak studied letter frequencies and the physiology of people’s hands and
created a layout to alleviate the problems he identified with the QWERTY
layout. The layout he created adheres to these principles:
Letters should be typed by alternating between hands (which makes typing more
rhythmic, increases speed, reduces error, and reduces fatigue).
For maximum speed and efficiency, the most common letters and digraphs should
be the easiest to type. This means that they should be on the home row, which
is where the fingers rest, and under the strongest fingers (Thus, about 70% of
keyboard strokes on the Dvorak Simplified Keyboard are done on the home row).
The least common letters should be on the bottom row, which is the hardest row
to reach.
The right hand should do more of the typing, because most people are
right-handed.
Digraphs should not be typed with adjacent fingers.
Stroking should generally move from the edges of the board to the middle. An
observation of this principle is that, for many people, when tapping fingers
on a table, it is easier going from little finger to index than vice versa.
This motion on a keyboard is called inboard stroke flow.

